*** INSTALLING ***

TkMan has been built successfully by many people on many different
flavors of UNIX, including these: SunOS, Sun Solaris, Hewlett-Packard
HP-UX, AT&T System V, OSF/1, DEC Ultrix, SGI IRIX, Linux, SCO, IBM
AIX, FreeBSD, BSDI.  TkMan has been favorably compared to Windoze Help,
and now TkMan even runs under Windoze, if you install the
Cygnus Cygwin utilties.  As Windoze lacks a number of supporting
utilities, you do lose some functionality, including formatting pages
on-the-fly, glimpse full-text searching, apropos, and printing.

Before you report a problem in getting TkMan
installed on your machine, double check that you haven't overlooked
something important in the Makefile.  And check the home site
http://tkman.sourceforge.net
to make sure you're working with the latest version.

Before reporting a bug, first check the home site to make sure you're
using the latest version of TkMan.  If you send me bug reports and/or
suggestions for new features, include your MANPATH, the versions of
TkMan, Tcl, Tk, X, and UNIX, your machine and X window manager names,
the edited Makefile, a copy of your ~/.tkman file, and the first few
lines of the `tkman' executable.  I'd also be interested in learning
where you obtained TkMan.  Feedback without all this information will
likely be ignored.  Send feedback to phelps@ACM.org

TkMan 2.2 is based on Tcl/Tk 8.4 and will not work with earlier
versions; it may or may not work with later versions.

Be sure to read through the Makefile as there are pieces throughout
the top half of it that you may wish or need to customize for your
site.  Set BINDIR in the Makefile to where you keep your binaries (the
`tkman' script goes here).  After properly editing the Makefile, type
`make install'.  Thereafter type `tkman' to invoke TkMan (perhaps
after a `rehash').



SUN SOLARIS, SGI IRIX, SCO, IBM AIX, BSDI
These systems store manual pages in nonstandard ways.  Each of
Solaris, SGI IRIX and SCO requires a special bindings file found in
the contrib directory.  TkMan automatically installs the appropriate
binding file for new users (those without a ~/.tkman startup file);
otherwise one can manually integrate the bindings into an existing
startup file.  Random System V based OS'es should follow the example
for SGI.  Solaris 7 ships pages as SGML; you should use the -c option
of catman to convert them to nroff format.  IBM AIX'ers should convert
InfoExplorer format man pages to the standard /usr/man/cat* format
using, I've been told, the procedure described in section 7 of the document
/usr/lpp/bos/bsdadm or in the FAQ for the comp.unix.aix newsgroup.
BSDI users should replace makewhatis with some freely available
version of mkwhatis--one that puts whatis files in the right place,
though this isn't essential (don't ask me where to find such a
mkwhatis; check archie for freely available man page tool suites)


WINDOZE
First, you need to install the Cygwin utilities from www.cygnus.com.
(Maybe other UNIX-under-Windoze packages, such as NuTCRACKER will
work, maybe even be better or more complete, but I haven't tried them.)

In specifying the MANPATH, note that whereas UNIX uses the colon to
separate paths and the semicolon to separate commands, Windoze
uses the colon to specify drive letters (drive letters in the 21st
century--progress is a myth), and semicolon to separate paths.
Thus a possible valid MANPATH under Windoze only is:
	D:/prj/TkMan/man;D/Phelps/man
(Note that Cygwin uses a different scheme for handling drive letters:
by starting a path with a double slash and the letter.)

In the Makefile there are several places where an optional feature
won't be available, such as page formatting(?) and glimpse full-text searching.
Comment these out.


--------------------------------------------------

Be sure to look in the contrib directory for lots of good stuff.

--------------------------------------------------


License

This software is distributed under the Artistic License (see
http://www.opensource.org/licenses/artistic-license.html).

(This version of TkMan represents a complete rewrite of version 1.4 of
1993, which is copyrighted by the Regents of the University of
California, and therefore is not under their jurisdiction.)
